Add cellfinder GSoc projects (#114)
neuroinformatics-unit/neuroinformatics-unit.github.io: docs/source/get-involved/gsoc/projects_2025/brainglobe.md

# GSoC NIU Projects 2025: BrainGlobe

[BrainGlobe](https://brainglobe.info) is a community-driven suite of open-source Python tools. The BrainGlobe tools are widely used to process, analyse and visualise images of brains (and other related data) in neuroscientific research.
If you are interested in any of these projects, [get in touch](https://brainglobe.info/contact.html)! Feel free to open a new topic on [Zulip](https://brainglobe.zulipchat.com/) and tag the potential mentors.

Our working language is English, but our mentors for these projects also speak Italian, French, and German.

:::{dropdown} {fas}`brain;sd-text-primary` Improve `cellfinder`'s classification algorithm
<!-- Description -->

The [BrainGlobe `cellfinder` tool](https://brainglobe.info/documentation/cellfinder/index.html) is used to detect cells in large whole-brain images. It uses signal processing to find possible cell candidates and passes them to a customisable classifier to split the candidates into cells and no-cells. `cellfinder` relies heavily on `pytorch` and `keras`.

> `cellfinder` currently uses a residual neural network (ResNet) to classify cell candidates, and Deep Learning network architectures have progressed since. In this project, you will explore newer architectures for the classification network as alternatives to ResNet, and see whether they work better and/or faster than the existing implementation.

Reviewer: Not part of this PR, but I don't think DL needs to be capitalised. 

```suggestion
`cellfinder` currently uses a residual neural network (ResNet) to classify cell candidates, and deep dearning network architectures have progressed since. In this project, you will explore newer architectures for the classification network as alternatives to ResNet, and see whether they work better and/or faster than the existing implementation.
```

**Further reading**
<!-- The best pages include links to more detailed descriptions and related materials for each project. They might even include actual use cases! -->
- [BrainGlobe developer guide](https://brainglobe.info/community/developers/index.html)
- [cellfinder paper](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009074)
- [cellfinder code](https://github.com/brainglobe/cellfinder)
:::

:::{dropdown} {fas}`brain;sd-text-primary` `cellfinder` support for two-dimensional brain images
<!-- Description -->
The [BrainGlobe `cellfinder` tool](https://brainglobe.info/documentation/cellfinder/index.html) is used to detect cells in large whole-brain images. It uses signal processing to find possible cell candidates and passes them to a customisable classifier to split the candidates into cells and no-cells. `cellfinder` relies heavily on `pytorch` and `keras`.

> `cellfinder` currently uses a residual neural network (ResNet) to classify cell candidates. This network is designed for three-dimensional whole-brain images, but most neuroscientists take images of two-dimensional slices of the brain. In this project, you would adapt `cellfinder` to support two-dimensional data. This would involve implementing a new neural network suitable for two-dimensional images, as well as refactoring some of the signal processing code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`cellfinder` currently uses a residual neural network (ResNet) to classify cell candidates. This network is designed for three-dimensional whole-brain images, but neuroscientists often take images of two-dimensional slices of the brain. In this project, you would adapt `cellfinder` to support two-dimensional data. This would involve implementing a new neural network suitable for two-dimensional images, as well as refactoring some of the image processing code.
```

**Deliverables**
<!-- Goals, or expected status after Community Bonding Period, Start of Coding, End of Coding. Stretch goals? -->

> - A Python implementation of a signal processing algorithm (blob detection) in `cellfinder` that detects cell candidates in two-dimensional images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A modified implementation of the existing image processing algorithm (blob detection) in `cellfinder` that detects cell candidates in both two- and three-dimensional images
```

<!-- Is this project geared more toward a student level or a more advanced developer level? -->
This project is well-suited for an intermediate contributor to open source.

**Required skills**

- Experience with Python, [NumPy](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/index.html) and/or [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/index.html).
- At least initial understanding of machine learning algorithms

**Nice-to-haves**
- Experience working with machine learning frameworks, in particular `keras` or `pytorch`
- Experience working with image data

**Potential mentors**
- [@IgorTatarnikov](https://github.com/IgorTatarnikov)
- [@alessandrofelder](https://github.com/alessandrofelder)

**Further reading**
<!-- The best pages include links to more detailed descriptions and related materials for each project. They might even include actual use cases! -->
- [BrainGlobe developer guide](https://brainglobe.info/community/developers/index.html)
- [cellfinder paper](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009074)
- [cellfinder code](https://github.com/brainglobe/cellfinder)
:::

:::{dropdown} {fas}`brain;sd-text-primary` `cellfinder` support for arbitrary number of channels
<!-- Description -->

> The [BrainGlobe `cellfinder` tool](https://brainglobe.info/documentation/cellfinder/index.html) is used to detect cells in large whole-brain images. It uses signal processing to find possible cell candidates and passes them to a customisable classifier to split the candidates into cells and no-cells. `cellfinder` relies heavily on `pytorch` and `keras`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [BrainGlobe `cellfinder` tool](https://brainglobe.info/documentation/cellfinder/index.html) is used to detect cells in large whole-brain images. It uses traditional image processing to find possible cell candidates and passes them to a customisable classifier to split the candidates into cells and no-cells. `cellfinder` relies heavily on `pytorch` and `keras`.
```

> `cellfinder` was originally designed to work with two channels: the "background" channel and the "signal" channel. This is a limitation, because sometimes only the signal channel is acquired, or there are several signal channels containing useful information. In this project, you would explore ways to allow `cellfinder` to classify cells based on information from an arbitrary number of channels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`cellfinder` was originally designed to work with two channels: the "background" channel and the "signal" channel. This is a limitation, because sometimes only the signal channel is acquired, or there are several signal channels containing useful information. In this project, you would explore ways to allow `cellfinder` to classify cells based on information from an arbitrary number of channels. This could allow cellfinder to not just detect cells, but classify their type based on their shape and other features. 
```

Author: Nice!

**Deliverables**
<!-- Goals, or expected status after Community Bonding Period, Start of Coding, End of Coding. Stretch goals? -->

> - A Python implementation of a signal processing algorithm (blob detection) in `cellfinder` that detects cell candidates from brain images with 1 or 3 channels.

Reviewer: Not sure why I'm so against using signal rather than image!

```suggestion
- A modified implementation of the existing image processing algorithm (blob detection) in `cellfinder` that can detect cell candidates from an abitrary number of channels. 
```

> - A Python implementation of a neural network in `cellfinder` that classifies cell candidates from brain images with 1 or 3 channels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A modified implementation of the neural network in `cellfinder` that can classify cell candidates from brain images with an abitrary number of channels.
```
